- At it's core, leading a software development team
is about building and supporting a group of people
that deliver high quality software
at a steady pace.
To do that successfully,
you'll need to focus on the team's dynamics
and constantly improve upon them to keep the team effective.
The best place to start
is by building relationships with the members of your team.
That doesn't mean you need to be everyone's best friend,
but you need to genuinely care about and connect with them.
Carving out some time to hold one-on-one sessions
with each team member every few weeks
is a great way to establish these relationships.
In these sessions,
steer the conversation towards
what the individual cares about,
what they're interested in, where they excel
and what they're facing in their day to day work.
You need the team to be comfortable with openly
but professionally sharing their thoughts with you
so that when you need to make a decision or an assignment,
you can factor in their interests, strengths and goals.
It can be difficult to get some individuals
to open up and share their thoughts,
but if you lead by example and create the right environment,
it will happen with time.
When it comes to teaming and the work environment,
psychological safety is one of the greatest contributors
to a team's performance.
Psychological safety means that team members feel safe
taking risks and being vulnerable in front of each other.
When we think of leaders,
we often envision these superheroes
that do everything perfect on the first try,
and make all the right decisions;
it's just not realistic,
and if that's the image you project to your team,
they'll attempt to replicate it.
That's not an ideal environment
because team members become afraid
to experiment with new ideas,
ask for help or to acknowledge problems
that are holding the team back.
As a leader,
you have to set the tone for your team on this one,
and here's where I like to use
the team's agile retrospective,
which is a really great place
to discuss team dynamics.
In the retrospective,
I make it a point
to highlight the mistakes I made during the sprint,
then I discuss how I'm going to course correct
and fix the problem.
After seeing that you're comfortable being vulnerable
a few times,
your team will understand,
it's okay to be human and make mistakes.
And some will start openly discussing areas
where they could have done better.
In these situations,
you need to thank them for being open,
provide them with reassurance
that next time they'll figure it out,
and then point out something
they did well during the sprint.
Now, of course there are some mistakes
that should never happen,
and that's where you need to set
and strictly enforce rules for your team.
For example, hostile or abusive behavior is unacceptable
and it needs to be made clear that it won't be tolerated.
Then there are standards you establish
to influence your team's practices;
here, you should be firm,
but there's more flexibility
for negotiating how you go about it.
So, these are things like writing unit tests,
doing code reviews,
being on time and dependable team member.
The team needs to know what's expected of them
in certain situations
so they know when it's okay to take a chance on a new idea
and when they should be more cautious.
Here's an example;
I've always encouraged my teams to experiment
and assure them,
I'm not going to get upset
if something breaks in a non-production environment.
I have that conversation with the team
so they know I value innovation
and I'm willing to accept some mistakes to achieve it
if they're made in the right places.
That gives the team the space to safely experiment
without worrying about altering
or even deleting something like a non-production database,
which happens.
These standards and expectations set the tone
for how your team goes about its work,
and the results will show in their output,
as long as you set a clear vision.
A clear vision sets the direction for the team
and builds a plan to complete the necessary work.
To ensure your team is working towards the right target,
it's important to communicate with team members
about their tasks and get them the support to complete them
when they need a little help.
When teams have a clear understanding of their work
and can see how it contributes to the larger vision,
they're more engaged
and can offer ideas about how to improve that vision.
It's all about removing uncertainty for your team,
and in the long run,
it's something you'll want to teach other team members to do
because then your team becomes extremely effective.
These are the elements that build a great team
but each team is unique
so you need to tailor each element
to their experience level and needs.
Once your team is performing,
challenge them to take more ownership
and look for opportunities
to continuously improve their approach,
so the team can deliver even more value
to your organization.